+++
title = 'Introduction to the DRACC series'

[params]
    category = 'Regulatory'
    scope = 'Global'
    authors = 'Leenaars, M.A.G.J.; Šuklje, M.'
    date = 'January 2017'
    copyright = 'The Commons Conservancy'
+++

## Introduction {#introduction}

This document serves to establish the "Directives and Regulatory Archive of
[The Commons Conservancy]" - or DRACC for short. DRACC is a write only series
of official documents created and/or maintained by [The Commons Conservancy].
The documents in the DRACC series are numbered sequentially in decimal
notation, starting at zero and with an interval of one.

Persistent behaviour is essential to allow contributors to trust the provisions
made within these documents. The fact that DRACC's cannot ever be changed is
itself an immutable condition in an immutable part of the statutes of [The
Commons Conservancy]. A DRACC document can therefore be uniquely referred to by
use of the unique identifier "DRACC" with its sequence number in the series.
For mnemonic and typographic reasons, padding of the actual sequence number
with zeroes may be removed or added. For instance [DRACC 0001] and [DRACC 1]
both refer to the same DRACC document, in this case the document describing the
original mission statement of [The Commons Conservancy]. One can also refer to
it by its title as DRACC "Mission statement of [The Commons Conservancy]",
which has the added benefit of referencing the latest version, if a new version
was to ever be published. Please note there are possible exceptions to this
default behaviour, such as the one defined in the section "Constitutional
Realms" below. Authors SHALL explicitly mention non-default naming behaviour
prominently inside each DRACC.

All policy document that are offically released by [The Commons Conservancy]
are allocated a canonical DRACC sequence number. In addition, [The Commons
Conservacy] may allocate <em>namespaced aliases</em> to subsets of documents within
the DRACC series that belong together. An example would be DRACC ABC-Y, where
the namespace ABC indicates the <em>sub-series name</em>, and Y indicates the
<em>sub-series sequence number</em> (again, starting at 0 and using only natural
numbers). The use of namespaced DRACC aliases is otherwise identical to the
main document series, and is additional to the publication and numbering there.

## Categories and scopes {#categories-and-scopes}

Not every DRACC document has the same weight, which is why they are
categorised. The category to which a document belongs is indicated in the
metadata header at the top of each document with the field "Category". A
document that acts as a regulation is for instance published in the category
"Regulatory", while a document that is merely guidance but has no mandatory
aspects has "Category: Informational" at the top.

If the scope of a certain regulation is limited to a specific Programme within
[The Commons Conservancy], this will be indicated in the metadata header at the
top of each document with the field "Scope" (for the definition of Programme
see DRACC "Mapping Rights to Programmes"). A document that contains provisions
applicable throughout [The Commons Conservancy] is published with "Scope:
Global", while a document that describes something which applies only at the
Programme level contains "Scope: Programme".

### Constitutional Realms {#constitutional-realms}

While a lot of thought has been put into making the framework behind [The
Commons Conservancy], both external changes (such as important modifications to
copyright law, or even the introduction of new legal mechanisms) and
progressive insight (after being operational for a longer period and seeing
different types of Programmes scale up) could result in possible design
improvements to the initial design of [The Commons Conservancy]. But
improvements are in the eye of the beholder, and what is progress to some is
not unlikely to feel detrimental to others. The regime under which a Programme
is established itself is immutable, to protect those who feel the current
situation should remain. This long term persistence makes [The Commons
Conservancy] entirely predictable and reliable.

For those who would like to allow improvements over time, a special category of
DRACC documents was created: "Constitutional". Constitutional DRACC documents
themselves contain only an index which identifies a complete set of core
regulatory DRACCS. These authoritatively define all the required terminology,
and arrange the relevant legal matters at the highest practical level. Such a
comprehensive set of adopted principles and regulations shall be called a
Constitutional Realm, and the possibility to create multiple (likely mutually
incompatible) Constitutional Realms within [The Commons Conservancy] acts like
a versioning or snapshotting mechanism at the foundation level. Every official
version remains available to be used for as long as there are communities that
feel like doing so, and additional versions are added for those who want to
adopt them (given the proper mandate and adequate compatibility). That way a
Programme doesn't have to leave [The Commons Conservancy] just for the
possibility to change the regime or to keep its regime when all others have
changed it.

A switch of Constitutional realms is a completely voluntary option, which the
governing body of a Programme MAY choose to adopt if it so chooses.
There CANNOT ever be a mandatory 'upgrade': the responsiblity for
choosing which Constitutional realm is adopted lies at the Programme
level. A Programme MUST subscribe to one (and only one) single
Constitutional Realm. The reason for this exclusivity is that
different Constitutional realms may rewrite terminology and contradict
each other, so their regulations can be incompatible with others.
DRACC 0002 "Core Regulations" defines the first of such Constitutional
Realms, and it itself is an immutable part of the statutes of [The
Commons Conservancy]. By default a newly established Programme
subscribes to the most recently published Constitutional Realm.

The titles of DRACC documents that are part of a Constitutional Realm are
unique within the context of that Constitutional Realm, and only the Board of
[The Commons Conservancy] MAY create new DRACC with the same names. This will
allow these documents to be referred to by their name rather than by a specific
number, within the applicable Constitutional Realm. When a DRACC in a category
other than "Constitutional" mentions a regulatory DRACC by name, it does so
within the current Constitutional Realm of the Programme. For example, for all
Programmes that DRACC 0002 applies to as their Constitutional Realm, when such
Programmes or any DRACC they use refer to "Graduation DRACC", this means DRACC
0007, regardless whether there is a new version of the Graduation DRACC
already.

## Publishing and prohibiting new versions of a DRACC {#publishing-and-prohibiting-new-versions-of-a-dracc}
DRACC documents once published, do not ever change and cannot be withdrawn
(with the noted exception of a valid court order as described in the next
paragraph). When there is a need (and not to be forgotten: an adequate mandate)
to make changes to what is stipulated in a specific DRACC document, an updated
version SHALL be published with a new number. The new document SHALL clearly
indicate whether or not it operationally obsoletes or deprecates (a part of) a
previously published DRACC.

Similar to the lock on the parts of the statutes that describe the immutability
of the DRACC series, some DRACC documents are to be valid forever. This
concerns for instance the document that describes on how assets are distributed
across Programmes within [The Commons Conservancy] -- DRACC "Mapping Rights to
Programmes".

Any DRACC document MAY itself specify that it cannot be replaced, by adding
"Status: Final" to its document metadata header. In such a case, [The Commons
Conservancy] MUST never obsolete, remove or publish a new version of the
document except when it is forced to by a court of law. If a Programme is
Forked (see DRACC "Programme Forking"), any such locks SHALL propagate to the
new Programmes. Publishing clarifications to a document with status "Final" (as
new documents) MAY be allowed, but no new provisions may be added.

Making it impossible to ever improve a policy or regulation written down in a
DRACC is something to thorougly consider and reconsider beforehand, because it
severely restricts flexibility to repair mistakes. If only part of a certain
document needs to be locked down, or can be obsoleted but only after a certain
period of time or under very specific conditions, the status can be set to
"Status: Partial Lock", "Status: Time Lock",  or "Status: Conditional Lock". In
such a case documents SHALL contain a section "Status information" containing a
complete history of document modification, including the person(s) responsible
for these changes and a short motivation.

## Removal of DRACC documents after a court order {#removal-of-dracc-documents-after-a-court-order}
A specific DRACC document MAY only be removed in the exceptional case that a
court order valid in the country where [The Commons Conservancy] has its seat
demands the removal of information contained in it, and after a replacement
DRACC document (with a new number and with modified content) is created. All
references in other DRACC documents to the removed DRACC document SHALL then be
considered to technically refer to such new DRACC document. DRACC documents are
publically accessible and can be copied by everyone for free. [The Commons
Conservancy] therefore cannot be expected to govern copies by others.

## Recommendations on language use {#recommendations-on-language-use}
DRACC documents are formal documents that describe the rules and parameters
within which [The Commons Conservancy] operates. DRACC can contain instructions
which have legal consequences and may determine the operations of activities
within [The Commons Conservancy]. DRACC are therefore RECOMMENDED to take note
of [Bradner 1997] in IETF RFC 2119, and use capitalisation of the key words
mentioned therein to indicate Requirement Levels.

## Reuse of these documents {#reuse-of-these-documents}
[The Commons Conservancy] is built around the idea to empower communities with
a stable, lightweight legal framework. The framework is not limited to a single
instance, and it should be easy to set up and run your own version of the
organisation. There are valid reasons to do so, for instance because you intend
to serve a particular community or geographic region that needs special
provisions.

The core of the legal framework is the DRACC series, and therefore it makes
sense that this is available under a license that will allow you to reuse and
modify the documents it contains for your own organisation.

By submitting documents to the publication queue of [The Commons Conservancy],
a contributor acknowledges that [The Commons Conservancy] is to be seen as the
legitimate copyright holder and agrees to this vision and these conditions. The
contributor SHALL indicate the use of third party resources, and their
copyright status.

## References {#references}
 * [DRACC 0002] Core Regulations
 * Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997, <[http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119](http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119)>
 * Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International: <[https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)>
