+++
title = 'Decision handling procedure'

[params]
    category = 'Regulatory'
    scope = 'Global'
    authors = 'Leenaars, M.A.G.J.; Šuklje, M.'
    date = 'January 2017'
    copyright = 'The Commons Conservancy'
+++

Programmes within [The Commons Conservancy] (see DRACC "Mapping Rights to Programmes") operate under their own responsibility. Decisions within a Programme are made according to its own statutes and regulations, and in most cases can be implemented directly under the oversight and responsibility of its own Governing Body. In some situations a decision MAY require action outside of the Programme, such as publication of changes in the statutes or regulations of a Programme or new appointments of officers in the Governing Body. The Board of [The Commons Conservancy] seeks no operational involvement inside its Programmes, and SHALL limit itself to keeping the Programme running within the boundaries of the mission of [The Commons Conservancy]. Within those boundries [The Commons Conservancy] MAY also be called upon to enforce any policies set forth in the statutes and regulations of the Programme itself -- in which case [The Commons Conservancy] SHALL enforce such Programme policies.

The procedure as described in this document is therefore only intended to provide additional safeguards and transparency, by using a light-weight and non-invasive method of social control and auditability.

When a Programme is established within [The Commons Conservancy] (see DRACC "Intake procedure"), a functional email distribution list SHALL be created by [The Commons Conservancy] exclusively for communication between the Board of [The Commons Conservancy] and the Programme. All formal messages sent from the Programme to the Board of [The Commons Conservancy] and vice versa MUST be sent to or routed through this list and archived by [The Commons Conservancy]. All officials and observers of the Programme SHALL have at least one valid email address added to this mailing list. People on the mailing list are strongly RECOMMENDED to use an email account that offers protection against identity theft through use of appropriate standards (such as 'SPF', 'DKIM' and 'DMARC').

For every formal decision to be made, a notification SHALL be sent to the mailing list by the governance body of the Programme. If no objection is made by anyone on the list within 72 hours, unless another procedure is defined within the statutes or regulations of the Programme, the decision will be final and the resulting actions SHOULD be taken.
