+++
title = 'Workflow Orchestrator membership'

[params]
    aliases = 'WO-0004'
    category = 'Regulatory'
    scope = 'Programme'
    authors = 'de Vos, M.P.; Macauley J.; Trompert, J.H.R.; Boers, P.M.; Richmond S.; Huisman W.; Cummings C.'
    date = 'November 2023'
    copyright = 'The Commons Conservancy and Workflow Orchestrator'
+++

The Workflow Orchestrator Programme outlines the categories of membership, each with its specific set of rights and responsibilities. Organisations can either apply on their own initiative for a membership or may be approached and invited to become a member. The Workflow Orchestrator Board of Directors holds the final authority in deciding on the membership applications and invitations. All members will be publicly listed on the Workflow Orchestrator webpage.

## Worfklow Orchestrator Founders {#workflow-orchestrator-founders}

The Worfklow Orchestrator Founder status is reserved for the organisations SURF and ESnet. With this status, we acknowledge the efforts invested over the past years to establish the programme. Founding members can also be Worfklow Orchestrator Partners.

## Worfklow Orchestrator Partners {#workflow-orchestrator-partners}

A Worfklow Orchestrator Partner is an organisation that:
 * Utilizes the Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software in its production environment.
 * Employs a dedicated team for the development and maintenance of the Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software in use at the Worfklow Orchestrator Partner.
 * Actively engages in discussions to enhance the open-source Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software.
 * Contributes to features, usability, documentation, and examples.
 * Contributes to support and onboard Worfklow Orchestrator Graduates and Worfklow Orchestrator Sandbox members.
 * May nominate an individual employed by the organisation to become part of the Board of Directors.

## Worfklow Orchestrator Graduates {#workflow-orchestrator-graduates}

A Worfklow Orchestrator Graduate is an organisation that:
 * Is committed to using one or more of the Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software components in production.
 * Presents a sustainable strategy for the implementation of the Worfklow Orchestrator software.
 * Employs, or has a plan to employ a dedicated team for the development and maintenance of the Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software in use at the Worfklow Orchestrator Graduate.
 * Can request assistance from Worfklow Orchestrator Partners.

## Worfklow Orchestrator Sandbox members{#workflow-orchestrator-sandbox-members}

A Worfklow Orchestrator Sandbox member is an organisation that:
 * Is actively investigating the use of Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software but remains in the reconnaissance phase.
 * Receives support from Worfklow Orchestrator Graduate and Worfklow Orchestrator Partner organisations via various communication channels.
 * To transition to a Worfklow Orchestrator Graduate status, a detailed business case and planning for the Worfklow Orchestrator Programme software integration are required.

## Worfklow Orchestrator Donating members {#workflow-orchestrator-donating-members}

An organisation can achieve the status of a Worfklow Orchestrator Donating Organisation if:
 * It primarily contributes financially to the Worfklow Orchestrator programme equivalent to a minimum of 0.1 FTE per year.
 * Such an organisation can simultaneously hold the status of a Worfklow Orchestrator Sandbox, Worfklow Orchestrator Graduate, or Worfklow Orchestrator Partner member.
